README.md, before:


# Voice-Driven Coding Assistant

A modular, voice-enabled coding assistant with a strict safety architecture.

## Architecture

This project follows a modular architecture designed for portability and safety.

### Modules

1.  **Core (`server/core.ts`)**:
    *   Contains the business logic for Intent Parsing, Safety Policy, and Planning.
    *   **Intent Parser**: Converts natural language (Phase 1: Regex) into structured `Intent` objects.
    *   **Safety Policy**: Enforces a strict whitelist of actions (`LIST_FILES`, `OPEN_FILE`, etc.) and a "Deny by Default" strategy.
    *   **Path Safety**: Normalizes all file paths to ensure they stay within the `PROJECT_ROOT` sandbox.

2.  **Web Adapter (`client/` + `server/routes.ts`)**:
    *   **Frontend**: React + TypeScript + Web Speech API. Handles voice input, displays plans, and manages the confirmation flow.
    *   **Backend**: Express server that bridges the Frontend to the Core logic.
    *   **Executor**: The component that actually performs the side effects (file reading, etc.) *after* a valid confirmation token is received.

### Security Model

*   **Plan-First Execution**: No action is ever executed directly. The system first returns a **Plan** with a `confirmation_token`.
*   **Confirmation Gating**: The `execute` endpoint requires a valid token that matches the plan.
*   **Sandbox**: File access is restricted to the project root. Path traversal (`../`) is blocked.
*   **Whitelist**: Only specific intents are allowed. Destructive actions are not implemented in the whitelist.

## Environment Setup

1.  Copy the example environment file:
    ```bash
    cp .env.example .env
    ```

2.  Edit `.env` with your settings:

    | Variable | Required | Default | Description |
    |----------|----------|---------|-------------|
    | `PORT` | No | `5000` | HTTP server port |
    | `DATABASE_URL` | No | — | PostgreSQL connection string for audit logging |
    | `NODE_ENV` | No | `development` | `development` or `production` |

### Running Without a Database

The server starts and serves the full voice assistant UI without `DATABASE_URL`.
Audit logging (which records executed plans to PostgreSQL) is disabled, and a
warning is printed at startup. All core features — voice input, plan generation,
confirmation, and execution — work normally.

To enable audit logging, provide a PostgreSQL connection string in `.env`:
```
DATABASE_URL=postgres://user:password@localhost:5432/devvoice
```

Then push the schema:
```bash
npm run db:push
```

You can check database connectivity at any time via `GET /api/db-status`.

## Quick Start

1.  **Run the App**:
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```
2.  **Open the Web Interface**:
    *   Click "Start Recording" or type a command.
    *   Try saying: "List files"
    *   Review the plan card.
    *   Click "Confirm & Execute".

## Testing

### Manual Testing

1.  **List Files**:
    *   Type: "list files"
    *   Expected: A plan to list files. Execute to see the file list.

2.  **Read File**:
    *   Type: "open README.md"
    *   Expected: A plan to read the file. Execute to see the first 50 lines.

3.  **Safety Test (Negative Case)**:
    *   Type: "open ../secrets"
    *   Expected: The plan might be generated (stating "I will open ../secrets"), but **Execution must fail** with a Security Warning.

### Automated Tests

Run the core safety tests:

```bash
npx tsx test/safety.test.ts
```

## Future Roadmap

*   **Phase 2**: Replace Regex parser with an LLM (OpenAI/Anthropic).
*   **Phase 3**: Add "Edit File" intent with high-risk warnings and diff previews.
*   **Phase 4**: Add a VS Code adapter (extending `adapters/vscode`).

Commit message:

feat:add Docker dev env with Postgres support

README.md, after:


# Voice-Driven Coding Assistant

A modular, voice-enabled coding assistant with a strict safety architecture.

## Architecture

This project follows a modular architecture designed for portability and safety.

### Modules

1.  **Core (`server/core.ts`)**:
    *   Contains the business logic for Intent Parsing, Safety Policy, and Planning.
    *   **Intent Parser**: Converts natural language (Phase 1: Regex) into structured `Intent` objects.
    *   **Safety Policy**: Enforces a strict whitelist of actions (`LIST_FILES`, `OPEN_FILE`, etc.) and a "Deny by Default" strategy.
    *   **Path Safety**: Normalizes all file paths to ensure they stay within the `PROJECT_ROOT` sandbox.

2.  **Web Adapter (`client/` + `server/routes.ts`)**:
    *   **Frontend**: React + TypeScript + Web Speech API. Handles voice input, displays plans, and manages the confirmation flow.
    *   **Backend**: Express server that bridges the Frontend to the Core logic.
    *   **Executor**: The component that actually performs the side effects (file reading, etc.) *after* a valid confirmation token is received.

### Security Model

*   **Plan-First Execution**: No action is ever executed directly. The system first returns a **Plan** with a `confirmation_token`.
*   **Confirmation Gating**: The `execute` endpoint requires a valid token that matches the plan.
*   **Sandbox**: File access is restricted to the project root. Path traversal (`../`) is blocked.
*   **Whitelist**: Only specific intents are allowed. Destructive actions are not implemented in the whitelist.

## Environment Setup

1.  Copy the example environment file:
    ```bash
    cp .env.example .env
    ```

2.  Edit `.env` with your settings:

    | Variable | Required | Default | Description |
    |----------|----------|---------|-------------|
    | `PORT` | No | `5000` | HTTP server port |
    | `DATABASE_URL` | No | — | PostgreSQL connection string for audit logging |
    | `NODE_ENV` | No | `development` | `development` or `production` |

### Running Without a Database

The server starts and serves the full voice assistant UI without `DATABASE_URL`.
Audit logging (which records executed plans to PostgreSQL) is disabled, and a
warning is printed at startup. All core features — voice input, plan generation,
confirmation, and execution — work normally.

To enable audit logging, provide a PostgreSQL connection string in `.env`:
```
DATABASE_URL=postgres://user:password@localhost:5432/devvoice
```

Then push the schema:
```bash
npm run db:push
```

You can check database connectivity at any time via `GET /api/db-status`.

## Quick Start

1.  **Run the App**:
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```
2.  **Open the Web Interface**:
    *   Click "Start Recording" or type a command.
    *   Try saying: "List files"
    *   Review the plan card.
    *   Click "Confirm & Execute".

### Docker

Docker Compose provides a PostgreSQL 16 database and the production app in one command.

**Full stack (app + database):**
```bash
docker compose up --build
```
The app is available at `http://localhost:5000`. To push the database schema:
```bash
DATABASE_URL=postgres://devvoice:devvoice@localhost:5432/devvoice npm run db:push
```

**Database only (for local dev):**
```bash
docker compose up db
```
Then set `DATABASE_URL` in your `.env`:
```
DATABASE_URL=postgres://devvoice:devvoice@localhost:5432/devvoice
```
And run the dev server as usual with `npm run dev`.

## Testing

### Manual Testing

1.  **List Files**:
    *   Type: "list files"
    *   Expected: A plan to list files. Execute to see the file list.

2.  **Read File**:
    *   Type: "open README.md"
    *   Expected: A plan to read the file. Execute to see the first 50 lines.

3.  **Safety Test (Negative Case)**:
    *   Type: "open ../secrets"
    *   Expected: The plan might be generated (stating "I will open ../secrets"), but **Execution must fail** with a Security Warning.

### Automated Tests

Run the core safety tests:

```bash
npx tsx test/safety.test.ts
```

## Future Roadmap

*   **Phase 2**: Replace Regex parser with an LLM (OpenAI/Anthropic).
*   **Phase 3**: Add "Edit File" intent with high-risk warnings and diff previews.
*   **Phase 4**: Add a VS Code adapter (extending `adapters/vscode`).
